CHAPTER 6 
‌अध्याय  ६

CADASTRAL SURVEY 



Traditionally land revenues in Nepal have been ascertained on the basis of crude chain surveys of holdings, or by some ratio to the quantity of 
seeds expected to be needed for sowing or to the area of ground that a pair of bullocks would plough in a day or to the area that might be dug with a spade in one day.

पारमपारीक तरिकाले नेपालमा जमिन 

As a result land records have not been properly kept : acreages are not known while titles and boundaries are not always clear.

नतिजाको फल स्वरुप ॒॒॒॒ राम्री राखिएको छैन : ॒॒॒॒ हरुको बारेमा थहाँ छैन भने शिर्षक र सिमा रेखा स्पष्ट छैन।  


 When, as often happens, actual holdings are larger than to registered acreages, the Government loses revenue. Without knowledge of the quality of land-as indicated by its market values, or slope, or erosion evidence, or suitability for producing certain crops-it is difficult to develop an equitable land tax. 


A cadastral survey is an accurate survey of the quantity, value and ownership of land on the basis of which correct land records can be established and whenever desired maps can be drawn showing titles and boundaries in detail. In the course of such a survey lands may be classified and acreages devoted to various crops recorded. 

Cadastral surveys are important in clearing up confusions as to titles and boundaries, in developing dependable agricultural statistics, and in providing a basis for equitable land taxation. 

Heretofore, lack of trained technicians, equipment, and funds have prevented the initiation of a cadastral survey ; these difficulties must be overcome. 

Training "on the job" will expedited the development of lower level technicians required for such a survey. 

As far as possible, local people will be enlisted for training and for survey work then given jobs in their own localities.

सम्भव भए सम्म, स्थानियबासी  तालिम र ‌‌‌ ॒॒॒॒ का लागि छानिन्छन्  र तसपछि ॒नीहरुकै  ॒॒मा नोकरी दिइन्छ। 


Four zonal settlement officers, under a land Survey Director, will be responsible both for the training of personnel and the conduct of the survey in their respective zones. 

चार अन्चल ॒॒॒ कर्मचारी , जमिन  सर्वेकक्षक निर्देशकको माहतमा ,‌ आ-आफ्नो अन्चलमा  दुवै  ॒॒॒को तालिम र ॒॒॒॒ सर्वेक्क्ष्ण ॒॒  को लागि जिम्मेवार हुनेछन् ।

Gradually their staffs will be built up to include overseer teachers, inspectors, senior and junior surveyors and chairmen trained in the use of simple surveying instruments and equipment.

बिस्तारै उनीहरुको कर्मचारीमा साधारण सर्वक्क्षण उपकरण चलाउन तालिम  प॒ापत ॒॒॒॒॒, शिक्षक, निरिक्षक, उच्च र तल्ल पदिय सर्वक्क्षण र ॒धक्कक्षय पनि समावेस हुन्छन् ।     

The full staffing of the four zones (the senior technicians being trained abroad)will take about eight years. 

४ वटै अन्चलमा कर्मचारीको कोटा भरिन ( उच्च पाविधिक लाई विदेशमा तालिम दिएर  ) ८ वर्ष जति लिन्छ ।


In the Plan period, a little less than half the country will be surveyed with maps prepared and tabulation completed. The ultimate cost will be divided as between Government and landholders. The project will not only pay its way but will increase Government's revenue from the land. 


CHAPTER 7 
CO-OEPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
As experience in many countries has shown, co-operative societies may be one of the most effective means for rectifying social injustices and safe-guarding to workers a fair return on their labours. A farmer may work long and hard to produce the best crop that he can, only to find that he must sell when prices are low, in order to pay his debts, then buy back seed and implements and even food for his family when prices are high. for this he may have to borrow again at usurious interest rates. If unable to make repayments in full, he may find himself getting more and more deeply enmeshed in debt. If he is a tenant farmer, he may have to pay the bulk of his produce or earnings as interest to the landlord. The worker in a cottage industry may find himself at a somewhat similar disadvantage, unable to buy raw materials or equipment on credit when he most needs them, 
or to sell his goods in a favourable market. 
Co-operative societies, through which owner and tenant farmers, or town and village workers can combine to improve their economic status, are of several types. The most common because they are the most generally needed- are credit co-operatives and marketing co-operatives. Through credit co-operatives farmers may, as am organized group, borrow money from a bank at a reasonable rate of interest and together assume full responsibility for repayment on schedule. Through marketing co-operatives they may put themselves, with their combined product, in a more favourable selling position. being able to market their goods at times and in places of their own choosing. Buyers co-operative, purchasing in bulk all kinds of commodities required by their membership may achieve substanial savings. Often two or more functions are combined in a single society. Sometimes co-operatives take on additional functions, such as the distribution of improved seeds among their members or the building of storage facilities for grain, or the collection, grading, processing and transporting as well as the selling of goods which their members have produced. Teaching farmers and other workers how to organize and manage a co-operative society is one of the surest ways in which to help people to help themselves and one another. 
Although the ultimate aim of co-operative societies is to increase local self-reliance, organizational capacities and living standards. Government may and usually does play a decisive role : in the training of specialists in all phases of co-operative work in analyzing local conditions in order to ascertain the types of societies most needed in each locality, in creating an atmosphere favourable to the growth of co-operative societies, in teaching the local people how to organize and administer such societies in a democratic and efficient manner, in providing through state-controlled or state-regulated banks the initial financing required for loans to the co-operatives, and in setting up an inspection service to promote increasing efficiency and to guard against corruption and abuses. 
In Nepal the fostering of co-operatives will be closely tied in with the Village Development Programme. That programme now calls for the launching, during the Plan Period of Rural Development Programmes in 32 of the 150 blocks into which the country is divided for such administrative purposes, and for more intensive Village Development in 16 additional blocks. Co-operative offices or sub-offices will be established as a feature of each block programme. Specialists in co-operative organization will be trained in India or Ceylon, with funds provided through the Colombo Plan at a rate which will enable the cooperative work to keep pace with the expansion of the Village Development Programme as a whole. Financing will be provided, for loans at the lowest practicable rate of inters ; to handle this function in all of the local offices of that Bank. 
If the co-operative movement is developed in a healthy and efficient manner it will progressively abolish excessive rural indebtedness, contribute significantly to the raising of living standards, and develop among the members of the co-operative societies versatility, capacity for organization self-reliance, self-respect, and ability to conduct their own affairs in an honest and democratic way. 

CHAPTER 8 
LAND REFORM POLICY 
The present generation in Nepal as in many other countries, has inherited an agrarian system which fails in important respects, to protect the rights and interests of those who work in the land. In a country that is 95 per cent agricultural this is a fundamental problem, as recognized in the Royal Proclamation on Agrarian Reform. The term "Land reform" has now required a very wide meaning. The aspects of land reform believed to be the most urgent in Nepal and actions contemplated in relation to these aspects during the term of the Five –Year Plan may be summarized briefly. 
1.The protection of tenants : No statistics are available showing the extent of tenancy as compared to owner cultivation, in Nepal. But it is known that tenancy poses a serious problem in many sections where it is quite widespread, where rents are unregulated by law, and where tenants have no legal protection against arbitrary conviction. It is planned that during the first year of the Five – Year Plan legislation will be framed and proposed for enactment : the proposed law will place a reasonable upper limit upon the rents which landlords are allowed to collect in cash or in kind, and will provide for reasonable and just protection of the cultivator's 
security of tenure on Raikar as well as Birta land. 
2.The protection of hired workers : This sector of the agricultural population occupies the lowest status economically and socially. Legislation will be drafted and submitted for enactment fixing minimum wages and possibly maximum hours for hired workers and regulation the employment of women and children. 
3.Resettlement of landless farmers : Whenever new arable land is opened up for resettlement-through irrigation, drainage flood protection or malaria control programmes-priority consideration will be given to the settlement on such land of landless farmers. 
4.Birta Reform : A Birta is an assignment of land revenue to the Birta  landholder (Birtawala) and not to the Government. It originated in governmental largesse for meritorious service etc. The problems posed by this carry-over from a previous era are somewhat complex with variations in the status and obligations of the Birtawals and their tenants. The question of Birta lands has been agitating the public mind. There is sentiment in favour of the abolition of Birta holdings with compensation to present owners and pending such action for payment of land taxes by the Birtawalas. This problem is receiving careful study with a view to proposing suitable legislation 
5.Provision of agricultural credit : Many of our farmers have to borrow in order to meet their seasonal requirements for seeds, tools and the like and they are able to do so only at exhorbitant rates of interest. Protective legislation setting up per limits to the rates that may be charged is under consideration : such legislation may also provide for conciliation boards and a compulsory sealing down of bad debts. On the positive side active efforts will be made to hasten the growth of co-operative credit and marketing societies, which will be financed in part from State Bank or other governmental sources-thus bringing to the farmer at reasonable rates of interest the funds needed to meet his pressing requirements. 
6. Consolidation of fragmented holding : In Nepal, as in other Asian countries the fragmentation of agricultural lands has long been a handicap to efficient production in the hills and on the plains. Our policy in respect to this problem will be one of stimulation voluntary efforts as through co-operative societies to bring about a gradual consolidation of holdings. 
Concurrent with the above reform measures, a more adequate basis will be built up in land records and statistics. Pending the development of a full cadastral survey, which will take years, an effort will be made to improve existing land records, making use of village committees. (Present records show names of owners only, not the names of tenants of cultivators.) 
Much attention will be given during the early part of Plan Period to the evolving of and organization without which land reform measures however well conceived, cannot be enforced. Consideration will be given to the appointment of a high-level Land Reform Commission truly representative of all agrarian interests, to help in formulating and guiding the Government's land reform policy and its execution. 
CHAPTER 9 
IRRIGATION 
The population of Nepal, now about 84 lakhs (8.4 million) will probably be more than a crore (10 million) within the next 15 years. This means a serious food problem for our country ; even now food is insufficient and under-nourishment prevalent in some districts. 
One of the surest means of expanding food production is by increasing the availability to farmers of an assured, abundant water supply through the improvement and extension of present irrigation work and the development where practicable of new irrigation projects. The agricultural population is familiar with intensive irrigation farming and we have extensive water resources. Tributaries from the mountainous north join to form three main rivers cutting through valleys to the south the Kosi in the east the Gandaki in the central west and the Karnali in the west : these each carry a minimum discharge of nearly 10000cusecs. Other rivers, discharging a minimum of 150 to 300 cusecs , are the Trijuga and the Kamala in the east the Bagmati in Kathmandu Valley and Tinau and Rapti in the West. 
The present state of irrigation in Nepal is not satisfactory. Previously built works-the Chandra Canal, the Jagdishpur Reservoir and the Judha Canal system are in need of repairs. A large number of smaller irrigation systems developed co-operatively by cultivators themselves in some cases with government help are over­dependent on steady rainfall supply and tend to be wasteful in the use of water. The development of a vigorous irrigation programme has been a lack of proper administrative machinery, this is now being overcome. 
Several criteria will govern the determination of projects to be given priority consideration. One is wide geographic distribution. The transport of foodstuffs in quantity is so difficult and costly in most districts that we should help each to become as self-sufficient as possible in food production. Special consideration will be given to works in areas of chronic or acute food shortage. Projects promising the most substantial return on investment in terms of enlarged agricultural output will of course command high priority : important among these are projects which will bring considerable new arable land into cultivation. Special consideration will be given too to irrigation works that fit into multi-purpose river projects involving flood control and electric power production as well as irrigation. 
Funds to subsidize selected smaller irrigation projects with technical guidance when needed will be distributed through the village development programme : for these the farmers will supply the labour and part of the cost. Major irrigation projects will be in the public sector. Experience in India indicates that Government can develop such projects more rapidly than private constructors and being able to balance losses on some with profits on others, can select projects on the basis of need and still realize a substantial financial return. 
It is intended under the Five-Year Plan to recondition tow of the larger existing irrigation works (Jagdishpur and Judha) capable of watering about 9000 acres of paddy : to complete seven projects now under way with Indian and American aid which will when finished irrigate about 45000 acres ; and to undertake additional projects commanding some 200000 acres of arable land. The total estimated cost over the five year period is nearly 2 crores (20million) rupees. 
Experience in the neighbouring states of India indicates that the value of extra annual produce due to the introduction of irrigation is generally equal to the total cost of the project. This is an ext raodinarily high rate of productive return on developmental investment. Yet it is expected that the return in Nepal, from irrigation projects planned for the next five years will be comparable. This means that the net increase in annual agricultural production resulting from the 2.5 crore rupees irrigation programme may be as much as 2.5 million maunds (100000 tons) which, at Rs. 10 per maund would come to a total of about Rs. 2.5 crores. In addition. net revenues to the Government calculated at a water cess rate Rs.  8 per bigha (1 bigha 1.67 acres) on government irrigation land, would rise to a level of more than a million rupees a year. 
CHAPTER 10 
FORESTRY 
The forest resources of Nepal offer the country's most promising base for a rapid strengthening of the national economy. Potential domestic and export markets justify prompt measures for the early and integrated utilization of these resources. This must be done however in accordance with sound forest management principles that will result in sustained yield capacity of the forest –not in destructive cutting site deterioration 
erosion floods, and the depletion of wild life and recreational values. 
There are numerous obstacles to such forestry programme which to be dealt with must first be frankly recognized. There is as yet lack of a clearly defined forest policy and adequate forest laws. An well-organized, efficient forest service, dedicated to the wise use of forest resources in the national interest, has not yet been built up. Funds, to date, have been insufficient to employ needed personnel at adequate salaries, and to protect, develop and manage the forests on a sustained yield basis. To lack of research and training facilities, lack of transport and communications needed for efficient forest administration, and lack of modern equipment and techniques for efficient forest utilization must be added lack of public consciousness of the social and economic importance of the forests and the disastrous effects of past policies and practices. 
An early objective, under the Five-Year Plan is the formulation and enactment of a National forest Law that will clearly define policy in the management and regulation of both public and private forest land, and provide for an effective Forest Service to administer the Law. The authority of the Forest Service should cover all phases of timber production and the management of forest lands, including the designation of all trees to be harvested, the determination of stumpage prices, sufficient control of logging and other timber use and harvesting to prevent unnecessary damage to forest or forest lands, and all aspects of forest research. The law will need to take into account the requirements of individual families living in or adjacent to forests : the management and control, in the best public interest of reserved forests, protected forests, Birta forest lands and grazing lands; and the terms and conditions under which the cutting and hauling of trees will be permitted. The law will be designed to facilitate the domestic processing of forest products for both local and export markets, thus encouraging the development of a wide range of secondary industries. 
A first activity of the strengthened forestry service will be to prepare an inventory of the country's forest resources determining types, quantity, quality, density and accessibility of forest growth as well as information on prevalent practices, and current and prospective requirement. As rapidly as possible the forestry service will be staffed with personnel competent to carry out the Government's protective and regulatory policies. 
The forestry service will co-operate closely with other governmental agencies concerned with the extraction transport and industrial utilization of forest products -including the Ministries of Industry and Commerce. Transport and Communications, and Planning and Development. For the benefits to the country that can be realized from a balanced policy of sustained protection and effective, integrated utilization of forest resources are incalculable. Manufactures from forest products are discussed under Industry. 
CHAPTER 11 
TRANSPORTATION 
Nepal, as land-locked country between India and Tibet, with an area of about 54000 square miles is about 550 miles in length East to West, and its width varies from 125 miles to 150 miles North to South. The Northern boundary is the Himalayan chain of mountains the highest in the world. The rivers arising in these mountains generally run north-south cutting the country into many deep valleys. On the Southern border is the Terai a rich alluvial plain 20 to 30 miles wide. This is suitable for agricultural production and has a very heavy forest growth. The climate of Nepal ranges from arctic in the high mountains to temperate in the valleys and tropical in the Terai. 
The deep valleys and the extremes of elevation and climate make communication very difficult and there is probably no country in the world which has so few means of intercourse between its various areas. People living in small and isolated rural communities are cut off from each other. Each isolated region tends to follow a pattern of subsistence economy of the most primitive and rudimentary type, the lack of communication handicapping all prospects of development. In some localities there are soils and climate suitable for raising cash crops of comparatively high value. In others there are mineral deposits. And some places are very suitable for the development of cheap hydro-electric power. But the lack of a transportation system is the great barrier to putting these natural resources to use for the benefit of all. Without transport, administration is costly and the Government cannot fulfil effectively its role of promoting the people's welfare ; the existing exploitation of resources is inefficient and potential resources cannot be developed. For instance the forest area of Nepal is about four times that of the adjoining State of Utter Pradesh in India but, due partly to lack of transport the income is much less even though the natural quality of the forest is better. In these circumstances not only do trade and production languish. but there prevails a general lack of economic security. 
A. Highways. 
There is at present a total of 310 miles of road in Nepal. Some of this has an all-weather metalled surface ; some is usable in fair weather only ; there is a small mileage of asphalt surfaced road. It is thought that to effectively tie together all the communities and areas of Nepal, a total of 4000 miles of road should be built in the next twenty years. A master plan for such construction has been divided into four tentative five year projects. In the Fist Five – Year Plan, 300 miles of metalled road 300 miles of fair weather road and 300 miles of nine-foot jeep able track will be constructed. During each subsequent Five –Year Plan the fair weather road and track constructed during the preceding years will be converted to metalled road, and a new 600 miles of fair weather road and 600 miles of track will be constructed. 
It is difficult to assign priorities for road construction in the first five years due to lack of statistics on trade and travel. Use will be made of the limited data available from the collection of customs duties, and surveys will be conducted before the priorities are finalized. As most of the trade and travel routes are from Nepal to India, the alignments selected will be mostly North –South. During  the first five years further surveys will be made and data accumulated upon which will be based the priority for the roads to be constructed during the following years including those to India and the Tibet region of China. 
A policy of progressive improvement will be followed. The first necessity is the rapid construction of a system of moderately priced roads which will give the country year-round service for its most pressing business needs. After this is accomplished, the standard of the road will be raised to the highest level that the community can afford. 
While it is anticipated that there will be considerable foreign assistance in road construction during the first five years, there will also be internal costs for construction and, especially for continuous maintenance after the roads are built. To meet these costs and to augment the Government's financial resources for continuing economic development, various types of taxation will be needed including fuel taxes, registration levies and related fees, taxes on vehicles, taxation on land the vale of which is increased by the road construction, and "excess condemn ation" – a method whereby a tract of land lying on each side of a proposed road is acquired in excess of the right of way requirements and then resold after completion of the project at an enhanced value as a result of the new construction. A principle underlying such taxation is that the beneficiaries from the improved transportation should share equitably in meeting the burden. 
In the first year the main emphasis will be on the collection of the technical staffs for survey work, fixation of the alignments, preparation of the projects, completion of the reconnaissance's of the hill alignments, completion of the detailed survey of the alignments in the plain regions, the cutting of tracks in the hills, from two to six feet in width to make possible the carrying out of detailed surveys, and the training of personnel for construction work. In the second year the work of survey and alignment will move forward and 12 feet roads will be constructed on those alignments whose survey has been completed in the first year. From the third year 
on the work will be in full swing; 
Arrangements will be made for the recruitment of local labour as required, for whom campus will be set up with sanitary facilities pure drinking water, consumer stores facilities for recreation and programmes of entertainment and social education. The cost of this will not be large but the effect on the morale and the well­being of the labour will be important. 
A major problem, however, is our shortage of technical and supervisory personnel for survey and construction work. In addition to highly trained engineers we shall need in substantial numbers, assistant engineers, overseers, draughts men surveyors, computers accountants and clerical staffs. A table of personnel requirements has been drawn up for the first year of the Plan, with detailed estimates for the next four years. In the initial phases it will be necessary to place heavy reliance upon trained personnel from other countries, especially for the higher technical posts. Arrangements are being negotiated for the loan of such personnel. Meanwhile, detailed plans are being laid for the training of our own technicians in requisite numbers. A selected number will be sent to technical institutions abroad for intensive study: upon their return they will be promptly attached to working parties for practical experience preparatory to assuming active executive and engineering responsibilities. Facilities for the training in Nepal of junior technical personnel including overseers, draughtsmen, surveyors, computers, accounts and clerical staffs will be expanded during the first years in order to meet as rapidly as possible the growing requirements for such personnel. In addition, young men with rudimentary knowledge will be attached to survey and construction parties for practical in -service training. 
B. Ropeways. 
The means of transportation into Kathmandu Valley from the South are : (1) by air (2) by the Tribhuvana Raj Path, a motor road in the final stages of construction. (3) by bridle path. (4) by ropeway. 
The ropeway is of the greatest economic importance as it is by far the cheapest means of bringing foodstuffs and essential goods into Kathmandu Valley with its population of over 600000. 
In 1927 when the ropeway was constructed from Dhursing to Matatirth, a distance of 14 miles, it had a capacity of 8 tons per hour. Now, after nearly thirty years of operation, due to wear and tear and the non-replacement of moving parts, the capacity has been reduced to 5 tons or less per hour. A year ago a four mile extension from Matatirth to Bhansar was completed. This has not been brought into operation because its carriers and spare parts were cannibalised to keep the original ropeway in operation. The ropeway has served the Valley very well indeed, and even now, working 12 hours per day, 60 tons of goods are brought in daily. However, it needs either a major overhaul or a replacement by new construction. The former would cost nearly Rs. 7 lakhs. In addition, because of landslides and severe erosion which has endangered the tower, four miles of the ropeway would have to be realigned at an additional cast of Rs. 8 lakhs. It is believed that new construction would be more economical in the end and would serve better the needs of Valley. A total of 225 tons of goods are now imported into the Valley daily by all methods. There has been a normal yearly increase of about 10 tons per day. With new economic development the rate of increase may be substantially accelerated. Considering this it is proposed to construct an entirely new ropeway with a capacity of 20 tons per hour. This would greatly decrease the cost of transporting goods to and from Kathmandu Valley. 
The bulk of the goods now coming from India are transferred from the Indian meter-gauge railroad at Raxaul to the Nepal narrow gauge railroad, thence shipped to Amlekhgang from where they are transferred again to trucks and brought by road to Dhursing, the terminus of the ropeway. Under the section on Railroads, below it is proposed to change the present narrow gauge railway to meter gauge and to extend it to Hitaura. When this is assured the new 20 tons per hour ropeway should be extended to Hitaura so that goods could be brought to Kathmandu from India with only one transfer, from railway to ropeway at Hitaura. Alternatively, if necessary the Kathamandu Hitaura, ropeway might be extended to Amlekhganj. 
When replaced, the existing ropeway can be salvaged, and in smaller sections can be used in several places in Nepal that greatly need this means of transportation. The replacement of the present line will thus not only be of advantage to Kathmandu Valley, but also to other places where sections of this line will be used. As power will be made available at many places during the next five years there should be no difficulty in working these ropeways after they have been installed. 
Since ropeways are particularly well adapted for transport in rugged terrain, extensive surveys are planned looking to future developments in this form of transportation in Nepal. 
C. Railroads. 
The Nepal Government Railway, a 2 foot 6 inches narrow gauge line was constructed in 1927. This line is 29 miles long and runs from Raxaul on the Indian border to Amlekhganj near the foothills. 
The condition of the railway is reasonably good when the lack of maintenance and materials is taken into consideration . The goods traffic is steadily increasing and it is not anticipated that the railroad can take care of continuing enlargement of traffic without improvement. an Indian Railway officer's delegation inspected the above railway in 1952 and listed five courses of possible action: (1) Rehabilitation of the present line at minimum expenses, estimated cost Rs. 17 laks. (2)Rehabilitation as a permanent measure estimated cost, 41.5 lakhs (3) Conversion of the present line from narrow gauge to meter gauge, estimated cost at 3.25 lakhs per mile, Rs 105 laks excluding rolling stock, workshop equipment. (4) Extension of the narrow gauge line to Hitaura after rehabilitating the existing line, estimated cost, including additional rolling stock, Rs 191.5 Lakhs.(5) Conversion of the existing narrow gauge line, then extending the meter gauge line to Hitaura ; estimated cost (a) conversion of present line to meter gauge. Rs. 105 lakhs (as in 3 above), and (b) construction of 25 miles extension to Hitaura at 9 lakhs per mile Rs. 225 lakhs –total 330 lakhs. 
The fifth alternative was recommended for many reasons; to eliminate transhipment at Raxaul ; to provide increased carrying capacity to meet increased demand : to provide through train service to meter gauge connections in India : to export raw materials, forest products, ballast, lime and other products to India at cheaper rates to competitive markets' to standardize maintenance and by uniformity with nearby Indian railways, to encourage and development of our railway, lessen transport costs, facilitate training of personnel, and expedite procurement of equipment and spare parts. 
In addition, the railhead at Hitaura would link up with the proposed extended ropeway to Kathmandu, which would greatly facilitate the shipment of goods from India to Kathmandu as well as greatly reduce the shipping costs. Instead of having the three transjo[,emt [pomts at Raxai;. Amlekhganj and Dhursing , we shall have but one at Hitaura. 
At Hitaura the line would more easily serve also the Rapti Valley which is under extensive development, and would be come an important junction fort the export from Nepal of fores products, cement and other goods. 
Under the Five-Year Plan it is proposed that surveys of the route be made the first year, with actual construction to start at the beginning of the second year. 
Most of the senior officers of the present railway organization will have retired by the time the new railway is completed. It is therefore, essential that suitable candidates for the different jobs be selected as soon as possible and sent to India for training so that the new meter gauge system can continue to be run efficiently by our own men. 
D. Aerodromes and Airways: 

The following table landings for all existing airfields in Nepal during the years 1951-55 is indicative of the increasing volume of Air traffic. 

तल दिएको तालिका  

Year 	Number of Landing 

साल	अवतर्ण  सङ्खया 

1951	200
१९५१	२०० 
1952	900 
१९५२	९००
1953	2100
१९५३ 	२१०० 
1954	4200 
१९५४	४२००
1955	4800 
१९५५	४८००

The main objectives of the Five –Year Plan for civil aviation are : (1) The development of an efficiently operation Air transport system to meet the country's minimum needs through improvements in the existing airfields and their facilities; (2)addition of a limited number of fair weather airfields; (3)suitable co-ordination of air transport with other forms of transportation envisaged under the Five – Year Plan ; and (4) preparation for a systematic transition of Nepalese airlines under an agreed pattern to national ownership and control. 
The 	tentative order of priority for improving the existing airstrips is as follows : 
1 Simra : Simra is the nearest feeding and refueling point to Kathmandu and has the greatest amount of traffic. The field is very soft and is unusable during the greater part of the monsoon. 
2 Bhairawa : The runway is very soft and should be metalled to meet the increasing traffic demand between Bhairawa and Pokhara. 
3 Pokhara : Pokhara is the best of the fair weather strips but is undulating It can wait for three years for development into an all weather runway 
4 Biratnagar : This has the least traffic at present, but when new airstrips at Janakpur and Rajbiraj 

are completed, Biratnaga will assume more importance. During the first year of the Five –Year Plan traffic and site surveys will be carried out to determine the desirability of new air-strips. 
A proposal prepared by the Committee for the Organization of Air Nepal is now receiving Governmental consideration Under this proposal a temporary construction agency would be established staffed as far as possible with Nepalese personnel for the construction of aerodromes, runways, airstrips and buildings. 
Planes would be hired on a charter basis from the Indian Airlines Corporation. The responsibility of operating and maintaining the aircraft would be that of Indian Airlines Corporation until Nepalese personnel could be trained. But the administration and commercial organization would be controlled and staffed by the Nepal Government. Such a development it is believed would yield economic benefits from internal and external trade and travel, as well as benefits from the defense and administrative point of view.
